you have this great empowerment over
your own life to to manifest the body
you want the mood you want the
relationship you want the productivity
in your work that you want
you know all these things are possible
but but but there's a an element that
goes back to the primal nature of who we
are and that is this amazing
genetic recipe that we all have but that
we don't necessarily follow the
instructions
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to health theory
my name is tom bilyeu and i'm the
co-founder of quest nutrition and i am
obsessed with actuating potential and
living the best life possible and i
learned somewhere along the way that to
do that mindset while very important
actually comes in position three for me
numbers one and two are diet and
exercise and so really understanding
health and its fundamental properties is
absolutely critical if you want to do
something extraordinary with your life
and that's why we've created the show
and today i am joined by somebody
absolutely extraordinary you guys are
going to love this guy he is one of the
most interesting intersections of mind
and body that i've ever come across at a
very good time researching him he's a
former endurance athlete author of the
primal blueprint i should say
best-selling author of the primal
blueprint he's written several books
primal endurance most recently the keto
reset diet and he's also the creator of
a whole slew of amazing foods that you
can find on amazon's where i got them i
don't know if that's his recommended
channel i'm sure you can also get them
on his website as well you can also find
him on
marksdailyapple.com where he is blogged
daily for 11 years which is absolutely
extraordinary
go check him out he's one of the most
important voices in the space without
further ado please help me in welcoming
mark sisson mark thank you so much for
coming on the show man thanks for having
me man very very excited truly to have
you on the show and
researching you so i knew of you pretty
well because i'm in that sort of keto
experimentation world i understand i've
never been truly paleo but i understand
the world and so you can't get that far
in that universe without encountering
you but really going deep and
researching you for this interview i was
like wow like this dude is really my
kind of dude so i want to start with
what do you mean like the slogan of your
company is live awesome right what do
you mean by that how did that come about
well it came about because people uh
wanted me to define what primal really
meant
um you know was is it paleo is it
primary
does it have to do with the caveman
experience or does it have to do with
you know some other primal urge primal
scream
basically primal is about extracting the
greatest amount of enjoyment pleasure
contentment fulfillment
uh satisfaction from every possible
moment
and
that's really what defines live awesome
how do you live awesomely you do though
you do that by by enjoying every every
moment possible but in order to do that
uh there are some
uh hurdles that we create for ourselves
in this modern life right and they they
may be in the form of uh making
inappropriate choices in how we in how
we eat or inappropriate choices in in
our um sleep patterns uh staying out of
the sun instead of being in the sun and
all these different things that uh over
the years i realized were critical to
our experience of life that that if you
make some of these decisions in the
context of wanting to be strong and lean
and fit and happy and healthy and
productive
if you are
mindful is the word that he is now of
all these
of how your genes manifest each of those
behaviors then you have this great
empowerment over your own life to to
manifest the body you want the mood you
want the relationship you want the
productivity in your work that you want
you know all these things are possible
but but but there's a an element that
goes back to the primal nature of who we
are and that is this amazing
genetic recipe that we all have but that
we don't necessarily follow the
instructions it's interesting because
when i got into health and fitness
it was entirely around my willingness to
suffer like so i grew up in a morbidly
obese family right so i saw what
happened sure i got sort of the natural
evolution of where that was headed and
so i made enough sort of early
reasonable choices they were not great
by my standards now but like reasonable
enough that i wasn't packing on the
pounds but then in in my mid-20s i
um i stopped eating uh fat because
obviously that was bad for me and i
wanted to
keep the fat down because fat makes you
fat and i was eating licorice literally
by the tub and i remember somebody said
to me
i think if you eat more sugar than you
burn it turns to fat and i was like that
doesn't make sense like how would that
happen and so
that began this really confusing period
in my life where i was eating less than
i'd ever eaten in my life but i was
getting fatter and i was like what is
going on and so knowing that if i kept
and i thought it was just genetics right
oh i've i've hit my mid-20s here we go
and
then really diving in and saying okay i
need to figure this out i actually need
to learn about this but i didn't come to
fat for years and years and years later
and
lived ultimately in this sort of rabbit
starvation
phase
but i was 60 pounds heavier than i am
now
used rabbit starvation to get lean like
i won't lie if you're willing to suffer
and you don't mind massive joint pain
like you can you can get by on like
ultra high protein really low fat and
virtually no carbohydrate
why is it that people need fat and
what's the the experience that you think
that they'll get out of switching their
diet around
well so that's a very complex
question um and com and there's a
complex equation behind it but people
need fat fat is a
you know provides not just
burnable calories fuel but fat uh
certain types of fat
play critical roles in the creation of
cell membranes in the
in the communication between
cells um in certain uh hormone uh
precursor situations
um
a certain amount of body fat is just uh
sort of requisite to be healthy in the
first place so we're not all striving to
be two percent you know body fat people
uh but the the idea that fat
makes you fat has been
long dispelled i mean this was like
that's a quote from susan powder back in
the 80s right
and uh uh and it still somehow made its
way into medicine for for some unknown
reason because the research has been
very clear
um we need we need certain amount of fat
in our diet if you
were to eliminate fat from your diet
which is what everyone thought we needed
to do for the last several decades
you're left with with um
carbohydrates and protein well
carbohydrates are sugars every virtually
every carbohydrate turns into sugar body
can't burn that much sugar
blood sugar normal blood sugar
represents about a teaspoon full of
blood in your entire sugar in your
entire bloodstream at any point in time
and yet we have this amazing
capacity to take those excess
sugar calories and convert them into
into stored energy which is which is
basically what fat is
protein again it's weird that prot that
people give protein even a caloric value
because we're not really supposed to be
burning protein you can ascribe four
calories per gram to protein you know in
a any any nutrition facts panel you'll
see it right there
but
maybe the first 30 or 40 grams of
protein a day
isn't intended to be burned it's
intended to be used to rebuild to to
create new cells to to build muscle to
strengthen bone to create enzymes
because all enzymes are are derived from
the amino acids that are in protein i
wrote an article years ago called the
context of calories and one of the
things i would look at is you know if
you're looking at creating a macro
nutrient like profiling how are my
that's the big thing right now all the
guys are talking about macros what are
your macros right
you know um
it's far more nuanced than that because
some fat you're not going to want to
burn you're going to want to incorporate
it into cells some protein you're not
going to bur you're definitely not going
to want to burn you're going to
incorporate it into cells and and uh and
that leaves you know carbs which are
just a source of quick energy in the
form of glucose that we don't really
we aren't that really that good at
burning over the long haul
so we get into this weird kind of
um
situation where where like in your case
you had the willpower to undergo a
caloric deprivation but it made you
miserable it was like literally
struggling and suffering and sacrificing
every single day calorie counting
portion control all that stuff because
you kept thinking it's all about the
calories but it's not sometimes it's
about the it's about the the individual
nutrients and how you partition them and
that's kind of the beauty of keto for
instance is that we is that we we look
at how we can take
this
millions of years of evolution and
harness it to become really good at
burning fat to become less dependent on
glucose to spare the protein that we
otherwise would be burning for calories
uh and and it's all part of this
great
system that we evolved i don't want to
co-opt your show here but i want to talk
to talk about something for you okay
we talk about metabolic flexibility a
lot now in this new
era of of macros metabolic flexibility
simply means that you are able to
extract energy from the fat on your
plate the fat on your body the
carbohydrates on your plate the glycogen
in your muscles the glucose in your
bloodstream
uh the ketones that your liver makes
that's flexibility that's getting energy
from all these different substrates and
not
become dependent on burning
uh protein to create glucose
historically humans didn't have access
to food three times a day let alone
every day so wire to eat overeat uh
store those calories as fat and then a
day later or two days later take that
energy out of storage and burn it and
spare muscle and not have
angriness and all the other stuff that
that goes with that
it's such an elegant system to store it
and to burn it well most of us today are
so good at storing it
and then we we've lost
the the ability it's a it's literally
we're born with it it's a it's a factory
setting at birth and then we lose the
ability to take that fat out of storage
combust it as fuel
create ketones offset the need for the
brain that to require glucose
uh spare protein so we get this great
protein recycling system
take the opportunity to do a short-term
cellular house cleaning and repair
all all of this and all of it comes down
to the choices we make in our food
yeah i want to go back to what you were
talking about with um
the the suffering and so i got lean
because i was willing to suffer and be
at a caloric deficit and all that and
and i really didn't understand something
that you just said then and it it still
bums me out now because to give you an
idea my business partners had to pull me
aside and say you no longer have a
personality like that's how bad it had
got like everything was about like you
know can i eat can i eat can eat and uh
so pushing that off and pushing it off
really did like have a massive effect of
my ability to be joyful to express joy
to be fun and playful um
and
what i didn't understand was that what i
consider a key insight for anybody
that's just now getting into this which
is your body is so elegantly designed do
you not wonder why it stores everything
as fat right and so if fat is like this
beast that we're meant to be afraid of
like why would we have such a readily uh
readily available source of body fat if
we're not meant to use it as a fuel
source so that became one of the first
things that really clicked me into
experimenting with ketogenics
but i want to go on your journey for a
second so you start as an endurance
athlete yes totally understanding the
high carb world and how to use that and
leverage that for some pretty
extraordinary results first of all you
were in amazing shape
you were doing very well i mean maybe
not number one in the world but you were
a deep competitor yes so if you had all
that success what made you want to move
away from that
well so i had the success racing and i
had the success using old technology so
the old technology was you train your
ass off until
literally and you know until you can't
train anymore
uh so it was a moore's better
no pain no gain concept
uh and then to fuel all that work the
understanding at the time was that you
needed complex carbohydrate that it was
basically how you manage glycogen in
your muscles that determine where the
wall was when you hit the wall so we
recognized the the utility of becoming
good at burning fat but because we were
so dependent on carbohydrate all the
time every day you know you deplete
carbs then you over eat carbs at night
we call it carbo loading in the days and
you'd carbon load every single day to be
go out to be able to go out and do
it again the next day i mean i ran 100
miles a week on average for seven years
some day some weeks it was only eighty
some weeks 125.
and imagine how you know that's 20 miles
a day in some some weeks
uh to be able to repeat that you sort of
had to
um to to con if you hadn't learned how
to really burn fat well and hadn't done
the training
and and re re uh
reoriented your
um digestive tract and your enzyme
systems to become really good at burning
fat you relied on carbohydrate one
relied on carbohydrate i relied on
carbohydrate well
carbs are very pro-inflammatory over the
long haul and especially in 20 or 30 or
40 years ago we thought the furnace will
burn anything so it didn't matter that
even the quality of the carbs and i ate
complex carbs
quite a bit but i'd have pizza and beer
and i'd have uh you know
bread and rice and
cakes and candies and cookies and you
know anything that was carbs i'd sort of
take it in thinking i'm going to burn it
off tomorrow anyway
so i got really fast
and i trained my butt off but i started
to fall apart at a very early age i had
arthritis in my osteoarthritis in my
feet had tendonitis in my hips that
ultimately was what shut me down
i had
irritable bowel syndrome that ran my
life i literally from the age of 14
until i was 47
um was it was devastating
um i had uh you know upper respiratory
tract infection six or eight times a
year
uh just partly from from uh from having
trash my immune system
with the stress because stress is an
immune suppressor but also from
the uh having trash my immune system
from so much sugar sugar suppresses the
immune system as well so
on the outside i was like the picture of
you know fitness on the inside i was
literally dying falling apart the
running was a was a
effort to do something that science
showed would would improve my longevity
the diet seemed to indicate lots of
carbs go for it
um but so at the age of like 29 or 30 i
just said this is not working i retired
from competition i took a step back and
i said i'm gonna you know i still want
to be strong and lean and fit and happy
and healthy and productive i just
there's got to be a way to do this
without so much pain suffering and
sacrifice and was this based on science
you were reading no it's probably based
on science but most of it was based on
an intuitive approach to like wait a
minute this just it just can't be
going back to my my roots in college
where i was uh pre-med and i uh you know
i got my bachelor's degree in biology i
was focused on evolution evolution was
really starting to come to the forefront
in the early 70s and i thought well how
you know what is it about
where we are now in our evolution that
would allow us to adapt to training and
become stronger from from whatever we
choose to do uh so i started to look at
at ways in which the body would respond
to training
um and one of the key elements that i
think was overlooked for so many people
for so long is you you have to recover
you can't just beat yourself up every
day
a certain round of training requires
nutrition and it requires some amount of
rest and recovery in order to to allow
the organism to improve to the next
level because if you keep layering on
training and training and training you
go down this rabbit hole of over
training and burnout which is what so
many endurance athletes encounter like a
friend of mine johnny g who went on to
create spinning johnny was training for
this race across america and uh he would
be he'd he'd be doing 200 mile rides
with avocado oil
as his primary source of energy i'm like
dude
yeah
like dude you are crazy you you you know
you this is you're supposed to be
managing
glycogen everybody knows this right and
he would go no you know um
it's all about the fat and i try to do
the south african accent it's all about
the fat
uh and uh and the avocado oil and he'd
have these he'd take 1 600 calories of
avocado oil and some emulsifier so he
wouldn't throw up
and i started to think this guy's on to
something it's like it's really about
how you how what's the highest level at
which you can perform and mostly burn
fat and spare glycogen from within
rather than having to keep layering
glucose and glycogen by ex uh external
feedings every 15 minutes
this would this is counterintuitive
still now today yeah this would have
been so like sacrilegious back then one
how did he did he just have deep
intuition about it i think and of one or
yeah i think he was intuitive about it
uh i think he he you know he'd done
enough of his own research i don't know
you know where the research was coming
from um you know guys like finney and
volk were starting to get their work
published uh in those days so there was
there was a recognition that there was
this thing called ketogenics and
ketogenesis and that there was a way in
which you could train the body to be
better at burning fat but the question
really was how do you do that because
there was
again up until five years ago there was
still this assumption you have to have
glycogen there are ways that we can go
about extracting 95 to 97
of our energy
from fat when we are performing at a
very high level like for some runners it
could be six six 20 miles and get 95 of
your energy from your stored body fat
but you have to teach your body how to
do that that's
the development of metabolic flexibility
that i teach and that i'm such a fan of
because it it it manifests itself off
over a wide range of of benefits
uh more energy all the time
uh hunger being suppressed or mitigated
to the point you don't think about
what's the next meal and what's the next
meal and what's the next meal because i
guarantee you in your day when you were
doing this rabid starvation you were
always thinking like okay when's the
next 247 calorie bolus that i can eat
right oh yes
when you become metabolically flexible
one of the first things that happens is
appetite goes out the window you
discover you're much more efficient i
talk about metabolic flexibility i also
talk about metabolic efficiency which is
the the
ability to extract energy at a at a much
more efficient rate so you're not
um
wasting
calories or wasting energy good what's
the result of that that you need to eat
less yes it's crazy so
most people who have been keto for any
length of time will report back dude i
first of all three meals a day can't
even handle it it's like i couldn't eat
three meals a day it's way too much food
number two
i probably get by on 30 fewer calories
now
doing all the same activities than i did
before i was keto what's that about and
what that it's about it's about
metabolic efficiency it's about
um you know less
thermic effect of food you know
sometimes we eat a large meal more than
we should have and the body raises its
temperature just to kind of
burn off some of that fuel
right because it doesn't want that much
fuel at one time yes it tries to stash
the glucose into
the glycogen reserves the muscles if
there's not enough room goes to the fat
cells
you know yes there's some
protein but excess protein goes to the
liver gluconeogenesis gets converted to
sugar same same issue with that
so all these all of these
elements of of efficiency now you don't
need as much protein because you're
sparing protein instead of
deaminating it and then peeing it out
all the time
you don't need as much carbohydrate
because you've learned how to make
ketones from your own stored body fuel
those ketones
really reduce the amount of
glucose that you need to make or you
need to take in from the outside
um you know there's a
statement that many people make in the
keto world that there is no
requirement in human nutrition for
carbohydrate at all
because the body can make enough glucose
through gluconeogenesis and then offset
the rest of the requirements with
ketones
so the efficiency becomes
again a very
important aspect in
reduction of inflammation because the
efficiency also carries with it a a
reduction in reactive oxygen species
from the
from the um inefficient burning of fuel
to get rid of it uh the house cleaning i
talked about where where a cell will
look at the the environment and go
uh geez there's not enough uh substrate
around for me to dive to divide right
now so i think i'll i'll stay where i am
and i'll do some house cleaning and i'll
and i'll literally consume some of the
damaged proteins within i'll uh consume
some of the damaged fats
a cell might even say time for me to
give up the ghost i'm going to die
autophagy the the cell will will
self-destruct based on
the signals that it gets from the
environment which and that environment
is a a dearth if you will of nutrients
now conversely if you've if you're
eating every
couple of hours you know you're eating
three square meals a day plus snacks in
between plus something before you go to
bed which most people do the body goes
well there's so much food around this is
amazing so my cells
they can divide because there'll be
plenty of substrate and and food for the
for the two of me when i divide
but as we know from sort of the
anti-aging movement you know cells have
kind of a finite number of divisions
that's what the telomeres are all about
right and so if you can prolong that
time from from when one cell decides
it's time to divide
and not only prolong the time but then
have that one cell start to do some
house cleaning
that's a critical kind of
theory behind the anti-aging movement
and the anti-aging aspect of keto and of
intermittent fasting
and of long-term fasting
so there's there's a lot of it's like a
new era of science that we're in that
we're embarking on here
that kind of has to go back and refigure
the science because the science for the
last several decades has kind of been
based on
body needs sugar fat's bad
uh heart attacks are caused by fat and
cholesterol
um you know you can you can you have to
do exercise to burn off all the calories
if you want to lose weight all these
things have been shown to be
inaccurate now
one thing that i i think you have a
really beautiful way of talking about
because i know that some of the people
watching this
first of all they found me because
they're interested in mindset and so the
health stuff always seems like something
off to the side
but you've really talked eloquently
about you know not judging
regarding the food and
eating in a way that's entirely
pleasurable so how do people reconcile
the what i was told was the first rule
of nutrition which was if it tastes good
spit it out which i always thought was
really clever
uh and seemed true though if i'm honest
like in my period of rabbit starvation
that seemed honestly true sure um so how
do you walk people through that
transition of i'm fed up i've tried a
hundred things none of them worked and i
don't want to hate my life and i would
rather be you know whether it's
overweight or joint pain or whatever i'd
rather do all that to be able to eat and
drink and be merry how do you help them
see that they don't have to make that
sacrifice well first of all i want to be
clear um
i every bite of food i put in my mouth i
enjoy so i there are certain things that
you would say
hey mark this is really healthy you
should try it if it doesn't taste great
i'm not eating it i don't care how
healthy it is so i only eat things that
taste great i only eat to satisfy
my
you know my my my hedonistic side
the amount of food i eat um i've learned
that there's a point at which it doesn't
serve me to eat anymore so the
the the quantity of what i would
consider a serving has diminished now
does that mean i'm sacrificing because i
don't
eat till i'm full or i don't finish my
plate no it quite the opposite it means
i eat till i'm satisfied knowing full
well that a my body is really good at
burning off stored body fat so i got all
the energy i need for days so if i don't
eat for another meal or two i'm fine
but i can plan on eat eating at another
meal so i sort of
adjust my intake on a daily basis to how
do i feel i don't look at numbers i
don't i'm not one of those quantified
self guys i'm really operating off of
how do i feel if i have the energy i
want if i'm maintaining muscle mass
without any effort if i'm never sick
and if i'm not hungry
then what's the problem with how i eat
what does it take to get there it takes
some work to get there
because i'm telling you the truth is
there'll be no world in which eating
cinnabons all day is going to be healthy
yes you're going to have to give up
sugars so candies pies cakes ice cream
cookies
you know then you're going to have to
probably give up
if you want to go keto
bread pasta rice cereal now what can you
eat you can eat
all the vegetables you want all the
vegetables you want
some fruit meat fish foul eggs nuts
seeds lots of sources of protein
healthy fats coconut oil coconuts
avocado oil nuts
and then within this realm of food you
can do all sorts of stuff to make it
taste phenomenal the reason i created my
company is the sauces the dressings the
toppings if you can put those on the
food and they're healthy and they add
taste and functionality
you are so far ahead of the game and the
fact that you can't eat
a basket of bread rolls before dinner
comes or that you can't you know uh eat
a massive dessert
i think most people get that that's
that's a nice trade-off if
appetite is is controlled if they get
rid of hunger and cravings and appetite
if they trend toward their ideal body
composition if they have all the energy
they need all the time
if they sleep well
then you checked off all the boxes and
to to have given up candy or soft drinks
to have you know given up some amount of
grains was well worth it provided again
that you never go hungry and that you
enjoy every bite of food you eat so my
journey to ketogenics was weird and i do
want to talk so what got me into it at
first was anti-cancer the potential that
it had anti-cancer properties and so i
try
ketogenics and you've talked about how
people absolutely should not go from a
lifetime of being a sugar burner and try
to just like cold turkey go over to
ketogenics which i did so i had keto flu
like coming out my ears was a total
misery
and i was like okay nothing about this
is pleasurable at all ketogenics is
powerful if it has these anti-cancer
properties but it's horrific yeah and as
i was going through it
i used to have to ice my wrists every
day for 15 years because i had that much
pain in in my joints and
i in the middle of keto flu and all this
i was like wow that's so weird my wrists
feel perfect
and i was like you know just sort of in
the back of my mind and so when i i did
about three weeks of full-blown like
measuring my blood which you've talked
eloquently about the the dangers of of
paying too much attention to that um but
super hardcore i was even taking
exogenous ketones so like i was a blood
superstar yes felt terrible and at the
end of it i'm like i'm never doing that
again but this whole wrist thing i'm
gonna keep fat in my diet and see what
happens that was utterly transformative
but for a year people kept after that i
was like i'm never doing keto again and
people like no no it changes your
relationship to hunger and i was like i
don't even know what that means and so
for a year i didn't do it again and then
i thought
you know let me i'd been hearing more
about managing keto flu and i thought
let me try it again because this wrist
thing is real
and i did it again did it right and it
was amazing and i came out the other
side going
this is what it means to not be
controlled by my hunger but i still
don't know how to explain it to people
there are people in my life who i love
more than you can imagine and they're
going to die early because
of obesity related complications and i
know that on the other side of something
like the keto reset diet where it wasn't
painful the food is [__] delicious
and their relationship to change their
relationship to hunger changes
dramatically that they would
be stoked that they did it but i don't
know how to explain how it changes
well
you know the reason i wrote the keto
reset diet we have a 21 day stair step
program so in order to earn the right to
go keto in the book for instance
there's a 21 day sort of elimination
process where you're getting rid of the
pies of cakes candies the cookies the
breads the pastas the cereals you're
starting to incorporate more of the
certainly more vegetables because fiber
and vegetables are not a no-no on keto
they're actually encouraged
healthy proteins healthy fats
again taste is critical uh first thing i
tell people when they they embark on
this program is don't let yourself go
hungry don't set yourself up for failure
so if you do get hungry and you'd
normally reach for a bagel in the middle
of the afternoon or a doughnut or
whatever
have uh some nut butter have you know
some artisana coconut butter it's one of
my favorite go-to kind of take the edge
off things or a handful of macadamia
nuts or some beef jerky or something
that that isn't going to go back your
old ways but it's going to take the edge
off your hunger get you through that
period while your body is learning how
to to burn fat
so
the the reason it's 21 days is
when we
eat food every bite of food has a
hormonal effect on the body one way or
the other you got insulin you got leptin
ghrelin glucagon test testosterone
epinephrine norepinephrine
you could we could go on and on it's all
these signaling systems that that are
responding to the information that
you're putting down your gullet so when
you eat sugar insulin goes up uh starts
a whole cascade of events uh you know
shuts down testosterone increases
cortisol a little bit
on the other hand you take a healthy fat
in uh no no insulin
there's a different set of leptin
ghrelin interactions and hungered
suppresses because fat is is satiating
so there are all these different
uh
processes that happen as a result of
your choices in food
what we're trying to do in 21 days is
rewire your body so where i talked in my
original book about reprogram your genes
to burn fat well you're taking these
genes which are basically information
sets and you're up regulating certain
things when you say i'm going to deny
glucose for a while then the body goes
okay i gotta i'm set up for that so if
you deny glucose we're gonna up regulate
the enzyme systems to take fat out of
storage that burn it in the mitochondria
and if you do that long enough
we're gonna upregulate other enzymes or
other systems that make more
mitochondria which is where the fat
burns so over time you reduce glucose
the brain which is used to glucose goes
ah geez there's not going to be much
glucose i better go to plan b
which is send some signals and convert
some fats in the liver to ketones so the
brain is happy with fuel doesn't need
glucose
you know increase those mitochondria in
the muscles so they get much more energy
from the fat there's twice as many of
these little factory powerhouses that
are made in the sales because you sent
the signals to your genes to do that now
that takes three weeks it takes three
weeks to get about eighty percent there
so if we stair step this down for the
first three weeks
there's a midterm exam in the book and
it's basically how do you feel so when
can you wake up in the morning and not
be ravenous for breakfast how long can
you go in the morning without having to
eat without getting hungry can you do a
workout fast can you come home from a
workout and not eat for an hour and a
half um how's your sleep we have all
these and if you pass if you get a 75 on
the exam you earn the right to go keto
now in that process of stare stepping
down you get into this space where now
you're literally now the
you've clearly sent the message we're
going to have to make ketones we're
going to have to learn how to burn ketos
so the body builds the metabolic
machinery to burn ketones
and
that is so cool because that's again
tapping into that factory setting that
we all have at birth that
experience that we never get to have
based on our heritage of two and a half
moons years of human evolution and then
100 million years of mammalian evolution
before that to be able to to extract
that fat from from fat stores so it's a
it's a it's a stair-step process i want
it to be as
comfortable and satisfying as possible
now once you've once you've become
keto once you've built the metabolic
machinery
as long as you don't go back to two
three five hundred calories or grams of
carbs a day
whether or not you're in ketosis
you still have that metabolic
flexibility so i'm i use the word keto
now because that's where i exist i exist
in the keto zone some days i get 30
grams of carbs and that's all i get some
days i get 150 grams of carbs that's
what i get the difference is i don't
feel i don't notice any difference from
one day to the next
because i've built that metabolic
flexibility to extract energy from
whatever substrate is available
and
do you have a way of um getting people
to like a short analogy or a description
of what it's like to not be controlled
by hunger because
the people that i've encountered anyway
it's like they get it intellectually but
they're they're not moved emotionally to
make the change
yeah that's a tough one because so much
of our lives
revolve around hunger i mean i'll give
you an example
most people
you and i included
sort of live right on the edge of what
can i get away with
how much
how bad can i inject
and get away with it right and with food
it's basically what's the most amount of
food i can eat and not gain weight this
is how people think what's the most
amount of that dessert i can have and
not feel miserable or guilty
and so we live our lives that way and
and over time we find that some of us
even develop an exercise habit around
that like okay
um
i i go to the gym and i see people on
the treadmill all the time i'm always
interested in like why they're like
you're there five days a week and you're
doing 45 minutes why are you doing are
you training for a 10k or a marathon and
the answer is typically no i just i like
to eat
i'm like dude you would rather
be miserable for 45 minutes so that you
could
earn the right to eat something you
probably shouldn't be eating in the
first place how ridiculous is that so
rather than go through life
with this strategy of like what's the
most amount i can eat
and not gain weight or not
be sick to my stomach or not feel over
full i did a thought experiment years
ago and i said what's what's the least
amount of food i can eat
and
make i have all the energy i want
maintain muscle mass never get sick
most importantly not be hungry hunger
throws everything out the window so if
you can get to that point tim tim
ferriss would say the minimum effective
dose of food right but it's basically
like like how can i
um orchestrate my eating strategy so
that i'm always satisfied
but i'm also i know
where the limit is and if my limits are
three bites of cheesecake or four pieces
of of a chocolate cake or you know one
bite of cookie or in my case you know i
have a grain gluten insensitivity but i
can have three pieces of bread slathered
in butter
and that's kind of my limit and so i
know i'm not giving up bread i'm just i
just know where the limitations are and
i'm happy to i'm happy to incorporate
those so i'm actually playing right up
to the edge in my of what i can get away
with
but i know where that edge is does it
make sense yeah totally look i don't
judge choices people shouldn't judge
choices you need to understand your body
where your limits are um and and
i love this idea so
um lgn right so your community knows
well look good naked and you said
there's actually been a recent shift to
fgn feel good naked and you said i think
that that's really important why is that
an important shift
well you know looking good naked uh
for some people was like a primary
motivator most people on instagram
apparently
uh but in uh
in the real world uh and in my world
most people initially came to
primal blue the primal blueprint my
my site mark's daily apple because i was
talking about
about alternative ways to achieve
health looking good naked was a nice
side effect but damn it i want to feel
good i want the joint pain to go away i
want my i don't i want to get off my
meds
i want to lose
you know 100 pounds and and you know get
to a decent weight not lose four pounds
and get to a
you know a cover of shape magazine
weight so feeling good naked is really
about just you know like okay i just
i've you know i have energy i sleep well
i'm in a good mood i'm getting along
with my family i'm productive at work
i'm enjoying as much of every moment as
possible
you know that's really
what in my mind that's why we're here to
get the greatest amount of of real-time
pleasure in the moment as possible
speaking about pleasure i want to talk
about ibs running your life for like 30
years which is crazy this show is
actually because my wife was struggling
with
microbiome related issues ibs type
symptoms yeah but it got so bad that it
got scary
and there was a point where not to be
overly dramatic but i was like
legitimately you can die from these
symptoms
and so i started getting really freaked
out we took her to every doctor i mean
we were in the fortunate financial
position where we could just throw money
at the problem through money at the
problem and it didn't help it didn't get
better so then i was really in a
desperate situation and realized okay
i'm gonna have to learn about this
myself i'm gonna have to become an
expert in this and started going down
the microbiome path it's completely
changed her life i would say we're still
not finished but it's so much better
what what was that journey like for you
what is it that actually improved the
symptoms for you yeah so it was partly
um
my lifestyle that began with uh
emphasis on complex carbohydrates so
there's a lot of
quote healthy whole grains in my diet so
i always ate a lot of grains i was a lot
of
of uh seven grain breads and and uh
whole wheat you know pancakes and
buckwheat this and
and uh and whole grain that uh to the
point where i was in some
weeks some days consuming 700 800 grams
of carbs a day sometimes a thousand
grams of carbs a day
and that was always assumed to be like
the healthy way to go about things like
i got early on sugar's not going to
serve me as well as
as you know as a as an energy substrate
as whole grains that are sort of low
glycemic et cetera et cetera but what i
didn't recognize early on was the
potential damage that the anti-nutrients
in certain grains would do so
as i got deeper into the research i
still up until the age of 47 was
defending my right to eat grains even
though i was reading about i'd read some
of jared diamond's work i'd read other
people who were in you know indicating
that that that the the gluten in wheat
that the folded proteins the glyadines
the designs and corn and all these
different forms of protein
were so tightly wound together that
humans hadn't developed
an efficient way of of digesting them
because grains have only been on the
scene for literally about ten thousand
years
but i kept defending my right to eat
grains and
throughout my life it was
like i had to drive an hour and 15
minutes to get here uh this morning
happy to do it tom but i would have had
to think about what
gas stations were open along the way
with a bathroom in case something went
wrong i mean i literally lived uh
in fear of like having to go to the
airport for an early flight and and
having a you know 40 minute drive and no
no bathrooms a long way it was i woke up
with a with a severe cramps every
day of my life from the age of 14 to 47
pretty much
um sometimes when i was under stress it
became so debilitating
that um i remember uh having to go sit
in a you know in our hot tub at four
o'clock in the morning three or four
o'clock in the morning just to kind of
ease the pain
my wife one day goes
she says you know i just gave up grains
and i feel so much better you should try
that and i'm like wow i hadn't thought
of that even though i've been writing
about the possibilities so i gave up
grains for 30 days
the arthritis in my fingers went away
the
some of the tendonitis that i had
subsided the upper respiratory tract
infections went away and most
importantly the ibs went away it just
literally went away it was
it almost brings me to tears today to
think about how much i suffered
simply by assuming that
well since the rest of the medical world
and conventional wisdom and certainly
all the vegans think that grains are
healthy for me that couldn't be
problematic
having given grains up it was that was
really what drove me then to you know
write the primal blueprint to take a
position on how important nutrition is
for everybody that whatever
is is ailing you right now
may or may not have been caused by some
nutritional choices you made but but
certainly could be mitigated if not
cured by
alternate choices i'm pretty clear on
that i don't purport to know what
everyone is for everyone's condition but
i would say that that my job as an
educator is is to offer up these
opportunities like here's what the
research shows on
on on reducing grain consumption here's
what the re the
research might show on skipping a meal a
day or fasting intermittently or here's
what the research you know we talk about
sleep and sun exposure and
you know everything that has to do with
diet exercise health fitness and so on
when you were talking earlier about
in the 1980s
already starting to look at fat and
people were writing about it and
thinking about how insanely fringed that
would have been but now is really and
i'll speak n of one the transformative
effect of fat in my life can not be
overstated it literally can't be
overstated so it has changed so many
aspects of my life we haven't even
talked about like the
um the impact on cognition which is my
obsession
in that when i get hungry now on a high
fat diet i do not have a decline in
cognitive performance that that is just
transformational in a way that i can
explain being able to i once went
accidentally without food because i was
traveling for 24 hours i was like jesus
i haven't eaten in 24 hours like you you
couldn't have convinced me that that was
true so the the thing that's on the
fringe now which is a little unfair
because this is you know fat maybe in
the late 90s versus the mid-80s but the
microbiome yeah like every everything
that is okay so that's so funny you say
that because i look like i'm i'm almost
over the microbiome not in a bad way in
a great way but i've been talking about
it for three years now you know so i
feel like that i and that's part of my
being caught up in this
in this world in which i
i sort of sometimes preach to the choir
with my readers
i'm surrounded by like-minded thinkers
so a lot of us have been talking about
the microbiome for for so long they were
like okay we handled the microbiome
we're on to the next thing you know
um i think again it it's
some of the things about the microbiome
some of the measurements like trying to
trying to discern three or five thousand
different strains of bacteria and figure
out which is which combination is good
for you
that's a truly complex equation right or
the idea that you could do a fecal
transplant
from somebody else and then derive the
benefits from that in your own
particular
um you know uh microcosm uh or
ecosystems how more old tech could you
get than
consuming a [__] milkshake
right from somebody else yeah right so
that's as old tech as it gets let's not
downplay it either i mean like on a
ketogenic diet people would would ask
well how do you handle the biome because
you're not eating much fiber and i'm
like dude i'll probably eat more fiber
than most vegetarians i have a i have a
big-ass salad every day it's got 13
different types of vegetables and
lettuces and you know carrots and and
and tomatoes and radishes whatever and i
douse it with a high fat dressing and i
put some protein on top right the amount
of carbs in that salad is probably only
18 grams total
probably 25 grams of fat probably 30
grams of of protein
and lots of micronutrients in the
vegetables and lots of fiber like all
the fiber my gut biome needs so my gut
biome does not require bran fiber you
know to move it along
as long as i'm feeding my gut bacteria
what they
what they truly need which are these
soluble fibers that you can find in
plants in green leafy plants you know
vegetables
then i'm i'm com i am providing my body
the prebiotic fiber that a healthy gut
biome would would
uh thrive on so i don't want to i don't
want to overlook the importance the gut
biomass huge and taken care of but but
if you've
if you have a healthy gut biome then
literally all you really need to to
provide it are the fodmaps
ironic that that if you have an
unhealthy gut biome you get rid of all
these things but if you have a healthy
gut biome then all those fructo
oligosaccharide disaccharide and so on
become the substrate that those healthy
bacteria use
to create
um
the short chain fatty acids and the
precursors to
neurotransmitters and so on and so forth
all right i want to bring it all back
around to living awesome yep so
what are some elements of that like you
told a really cool story about your
wife's assistant who had tried and
struggled for years to lose weight and
you're looking at the results she's
getting you're thinking there's no way
she's being honest about what she's
eating and then the result ended up
being therapy and i thought wow like
that that juxtaposition of your ability
to talk about like just a hardcore
biological science but then go all the
way to
hey therapy may be exactly what some
people need what are some parts of
living awesome that we haven't talked
about
well i think
play is an important thing so i you know
play is is a critical part of the human
experience we sort of ascribe it to
well that's something kids could can do
until they're you know adolescents and
then they got to be grown ups and they
got to act mature and then once you're
once you're a grown-up
play is really a luxury that
probably we don't need well in fact play
is critical to our development not just
as as young adults but also throughout
our experience i like to go stand-up
paddling i have fun stand up paddling
there's never a point when i'm on the
board when i go oh geez when's it going
to be over which was like happened a lot
when i was a runner or a cyclist
so i stand up paddle i like this i like
to snowboard
i like to you know i want to do things
that are fun i want to play i i spend
now let's shift gears a little bit use
your brain i
my kids had this i read a book recently
about orchestrating your life and my son
said dad what gets you up every morning
and i said the first thing gets me up is
i can't wait to have a cup of coffee and
do the crossword puzzle so it's
something as simple as that like i get
to use my brain every day before i go
use my brain
for uh for production and for work
um
sleep you cannot be cannot be uh under
uh overemphasize or overlooked its sleep
is so critical to what we do and having
a regular sleep routine
um and that's one of the that's that's a
part of living awesome part of living
awesome is is not being
um uh apologetic from the amount of
sleep you're getting but being proud of
it and enjoying it and reveling in it
you know
um sun exposure you know people think
well i you know i'm told by my
dermatologist i got to stay out of the
sun well no some amount of sun exposure
is actually a good thing
is probably um better for you than
avoiding the sun it just you have to
know where the limit is for you
so in
part of being out the sun is actually
being outside which has its own sort of
mood enhancing benefits of being outside
in nature hearing
you know the wind or hearing the birds
or hearing you know whatever
that's amazing all right before i ask my
last question where can these guys find
you online where you find your book yeah
so mark's dailyapple.com is the blog
it's been around for 11 years as you say
um
ketoreset.com
uh information about where to buy the
book links to where we can get it online
i mean all the all the normal places
and then uh primalblueprint.com is our
is our ecom site if you want to look
into
um the dressings and the mayonnaise is
that we the healthy sauces dressings and
toppings that we that we offer
cool and what's the impact that you want
to have on the world how do you do all
of this yeah well i do this because i
want to change the way the world eats
right i want i see the power of food so
so intimately and strongly that i think
that that like i've made these kind of
blanket
assertions that we could take a trillion
dollars off the national health bill
in the next 18 months if everybody ate
the way you and i know we should be
eating without sacrifice struggling or
suffering so my mission is literally to
affect the health of
100 million people
primarily through
through reorienting their their way of
eating in a way that um develops
metabolic flexibility see how we brought
that back i like that awesome mark thank
you so much for joining me thank you
all right guys this is somebody that you
are absolutely going to want to dive in
go to his blog in fact i sent it around
to my entire team because i think it
does such an amazing job of walking
people through exactly what they need to
do of making it accessible this is
somebody who understands the
intersection of the science and the
humanity of why you would want to change
the fact that this tag line is live
awesome and not be shredded uh you had
me at hello i think it's incredible that
last bit that he just did of listing all
the other things that we didn't really
get a chance to dive deep on a you're
gonna be able to dive deep into that in
his world and i think that they're all
critical not the least of which is play
to have fun to enjoy your life that's
that is the whole reason that this show
exists is to find ways for you to enjoy
your life more to get the potential out
of yourself that's there that is
unfortunately dormant unless you do
something with it and i really really
encourage you guys to go dive into his
world i think it is it is truly
unparalleled in its ability to bring
those two things together and to give
you a blueprint
a primal blueprint nonetheless for how
to live your life in just a better way
that is going to make your life better
in a thousand ways
all right guys if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
[Music]
you